docs/FAQ.md, before:

---
title: "The sds-local-volume module: FAQ"
description: "The sds-local-volume module: FAQ"
---

## What is difference between LVM and LVMThin?

- LVM is simpler and has high performance that is similar to that of native disk drives;
- LVMThin allows overprovisioning; however, it is slower than LVM.

{{< alert level="warning" >}} 
Overprovisioning in LVMThin should be used with caution, monitoring the availability of free space in the pool (The cluster monitoring system generates separate events when the free space in the pool reaches 20%, 10%, 5%, and 1%).

In case of no free space in the pool, degradation in the module's operation as a whole will be observed, and there is a real possibility of data loss!
{{< /alert >}}

## How do I set the default StorageClass?

Set the `spec.IsDefault` field to `true` in the corresponding [LocalStorageClass](./cr.html#localstorageclass) custom resource.

## I don't want the module to be used on all nodes of the cluster. How can I select the desired nodes?
The nodes that will be involved with the module are determined by special labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field in the module settings.

To display and edit the module settings, you can execute the command:

```shell
kubectl edit mc sds-local-volume
```

The approximate output of the command would be:

```yaml
apiVersion: deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
kind: ModuleConfig
metadata:
  name: sds-local-volume
spec:
  enabled: true
  settings:
    dataNodes:
      nodeSelector:
        my-custom-label-key: my-custom-label-value
status:
  message: ""
  version: "1"
```

To display existing labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field, you can execute the command:

```shell
kubectl get mc sds-local-volume -o=jsonpath={.spec.settings.dataNodes.nodeSelector}
```

The approximate output of the command would be:

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  my-custom-label-key: my-custom-label-value
```

Nodes whose labels include the set specified in the settings are selected by the module as targets for usage. Therefore, by changing the `nodeSelector` field, you can influence the list of nodes that the module will use.

> Please note that the `nodeSelector` field can contain any number of labels, but it's crucial that each of the specified labels is present on the node you intend to use for working with the module. It's only when all the specified labels are present on the selected node that the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pod will be launched.

After adding labels to the nodes, the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pods should be started. You can check their presence using the command:

```shell
 kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get pod -owide
 ```

## Why can't I create a PVC on the selected node using the module?

Please verify that the pod `sds-local-volume-csi-node` is running on the selected node.

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get po -owide
```

If the pod is missing, please ensure that all labels specified in the module settings in the `nodeSelector` field are present on the selected node. More details about this can be found [here](#service-pods-for-the-sds-local-volume-components-are-not-being-created-on-the-node-i-need-why-is-that).

## How do I take a node out of the module's control?
To take a node out of the module's control, you need to remove the labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field in the module settings for `sds-local-volume`.

You can check the presence of existing labels in the `nodeSelector` using the command:

```shell
kubectl get mc sds-local-volume -o=jsonpath={.spec.settings.dataNodes.nodeSelector}
```

The approximate output of the command would be:

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  my-custom-label-key: my-custom-label-value
```

Remove the labels specified in `nodeSelector` from the desired nodes.

```shell
kubectl label node %node-name% %label-from-selector%-
```
> Please note that to remove a label, you need to add a hyphen immediately after its key instead of its value.

As a result, the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pod should be deleted from the desired node. You can check its status using the command:

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get po -owide
```

If the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pod remains on the node after removing the `nodeSelector` label, please ensure that the labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field of the `d8-sds-local-volume-controller-config` in the config have indeed been successfully removed from the selected node.

You can verify this using the command:

```shell
kubectl get node %node-name% --show-labels
```

If the labels from `nodeSelector` are not present on the node, ensure that this node does not own any `LVMVolumeGroup` resources used by `LocalStorageClass` resources. More details about this check can be found [here](#how-to-check-if-there-are-dependent-resources-lvmvolumegroup-on-the-node).


> Please note that on the `LVMVolumeGroup` and `LocalStorageClass` resources, which prevent the node from being taken out of the module's control, the label `storage.deckhouse.io/sds-local-volume-candidate-for-eviction` will be displayed.
On the node itself, the label `storage.deckhouse.io/sds-local-volume-need-manual-eviction` will be present.


## How to check if there are dependent resources `LVMVolumeGroup` on the node?
To check for such resources, follow these steps:
1. Display the existing `LocalStorageClass` resources

```shell
kubectl get lsc
```

2. Check each of them for the list of used `LVMVolumeGroup` resources.

> If you want to list all `LocalStorageClass` resources at once, run the command:
> 
> ```shell
> kubectl get lsc -oyaml
> ```

```shell
kubectl get lsc %lsc-name% -oyaml
```

An approximate representation of `LocalStorageClass` could be:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
items:
- apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
  kind: LocalStorageClass
  metadata:
    finalizers:
    - localstorageclass.storage.deckhouse.io
    name: test-sc
  spec:
    lvm:
      lvmVolumeGroups:
      - name: test-vg
      type: Thick
    reclaimPolicy: Delete
    volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
  status:
    phase: Created
kind: List
```

> Please pay attention to the `spec.lvm.lvmVolumeGroups` field - it specifies the used `LVMVolumeGroup` resources.

3. Display the list of existing `LVMVolumeGroup` resources.

```shell
kubectl get lvg
```

An approximate representation of `LVMVolumeGroup` could be:

```text
NAME              HEALTH        NODE                         SIZE       ALLOCATED SIZE   VG        AGE
lvg-on-worker-0   Operational   node-worker-0   40956Mi    0                test-vg   15d
lvg-on-worker-1   Operational   node-worker-1   61436Mi    0                test-vg   15d
lvg-on-worker-2   Operational   node-worker-2   122876Mi   0                test-vg   15d
lvg-on-worker-3   Operational   node-worker-3   307196Mi   0                test-vg   15d
lvg-on-worker-4   Operational   node-worker-4   307196Mi   0                test-vg   15d
lvg-on-worker-5   Operational   node-worker-5   204796Mi   0                test-vg   15d
```

4. Ensure that the node you intend to remove from the module's control does not have any `LVMVolumeGroup` resources used in `LocalStorageClass` resources.

> To avoid unintentionally losing control over volumes already created using the module, the user needs to manually delete dependent resources by performing necessary operations on the volume.

## I removed the labels from the node, but the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pod is still there. Why did this happen? 
Most likely, there are `LVMVolumeGroup` resources present on the node, which are used in one of the `LocalStorageClass` resources.

To avoid unintentionally losing control over volumes already created using the module, the user needs to manually delete dependent resources by performing necessary operations on the volume."

The process of checking for the presence of the aforementioned resources is described [here](#how-to-check-if-there-are-dependent-resources-lvmvolumegroup-on-the-node).


## Service pods for the `sds-local-volume` components are not being created on the node I need. Why is that?

With a high probability, the issues are related to the labels on the node.

Nodes to be used by the module are determined by special labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field in the module settings.

To display the existing labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field, you can execute the command:

```shell
kubectl get mc sds-local-volume -o=jsonpath={.spec.settings.dataNodes.nodeSelector}
```

The approximate output of the command would be:

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  my-custom-label-key: my-custom-label-value
```

Nodes whose labels include the set specified in the settings are chosen by the module as targets for usage.

You can also additionally check the selectors used by the module in the configuration of the secret `d8-sds-local-volume-controller-config` in the namespace `d8-sds-local-volume`.

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get secret d8-sds-local-volume-controller-config  -o jsonpath='{.data.config}' | base64 --decode
```

The approximate output of the command would be:

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  kubernetes.io/os: linux
  my-custom-label-key: my-custom-label-value
```

> The output of this command should include all labels from the settings of the `data.nodeSelector` module, as well as `kubernetes.io/os: linux`.

Check the labels on the node you need:

```shell
kubectl get node %node-name% --show-labels
```

If necessary, add the missing labels to the desired node:

```shell
kubectl label node %node-name% my-custom-label-key=my-custom-label-value
```

If the labels are present, it's necessary to check for the existence of the label `storage.deckhouse.io/sds-local-volume-node=` on the node. If the label is absent, it's advisable to verify whether `sds-local-volume-controller` is functioning properly. If it is, then check the logs:

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get po -l app=sds-local-volume-controller
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume logs -l app=sds-local-volume-controller
```

Commit message:

[controller] Remove isDefault field and refactor some logic in lsc controller (#39)
Signed-off-by: Aleksandr Zimin <alexandr.zimin@flant.com>

docs/FAQ.md, after:

---
title: "The sds-local-volume module: FAQ"
description: "The sds-local-volume module: FAQ"
---

## What is difference between LVM and LVMThin?

- LVM is simpler and has high performance that is similar to that of native disk drives;
- LVMThin allows overprovisioning; however, it is slower than LVM.

{{< alert level="warning" >}} 
Overprovisioning in LVMThin should be used with caution, monitoring the availability of free space in the pool (The cluster monitoring system generates separate events when the free space in the pool reaches 20%, 10%, 5%, and 1%).

In case of no free space in the pool, degradation in the module's operation as a whole will be observed, and there is a real possibility of data loss!
{{< /alert >}}

## How do I set the default StorageClass?

Add the annotation `storageclass.kubernetes.io/is-default-class: "true"` to the corresponding StorageClass resource:

```shell
kubectl annotate storageclasses.storage.k8s.io <storageClassName> storageclass.kubernetes.io/is-default-class=true
```

## I don't want the module to be used on all nodes of the cluster. How can I select the desired nodes?

The nodes that will be involved with the module are determined by special labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field in the module settings.

To display and edit the module settings, you can execute the command:

```shell
kubectl edit mc sds-local-volume
```

The approximate output of the command would be:

```yaml
apiVersion: deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
kind: ModuleConfig
metadata:
  name: sds-local-volume
spec:
  enabled: true
  settings:
    dataNodes:
      nodeSelector:
        my-custom-label-key: my-custom-label-value
status:
  message: ""
  version: "1"
```

To display existing labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field, you can execute the command:

```shell
kubectl get mc sds-local-volume -o=jsonpath={.spec.settings.dataNodes.nodeSelector}
```

The approximate output of the command would be:

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  my-custom-label-key: my-custom-label-value
```

Nodes whose labels include the set specified in the settings are selected by the module as targets for usage. Therefore, by changing the `nodeSelector` field, you can influence the list of nodes that the module will use.

> Please note that the `nodeSelector` field can contain any number of labels, but it's crucial that each of the specified labels is present on the node you intend to use for working with the module. It's only when all the specified labels are present on the selected node that the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pod will be launched.

After adding labels to the nodes, the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pods should be started. You can check their presence using the command:

```shell
 kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get pod -owide
 ```

## Why can't I create a PVC on the selected node using the module?

Please verify that the pod `sds-local-volume-csi-node` is running on the selected node.

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get po -owide
```

If the pod is missing, please ensure that all labels specified in the module settings in the `nodeSelector` field are present on the selected node. More details about this can be found [here](#service-pods-for-the-sds-local-volume-components-are-not-being-created-on-the-node-i-need-why-is-that).

## How do I take a node out of the module's control?
To take a node out of the module's control, you need to remove the labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field in the module settings for `sds-local-volume`.

You can check the presence of existing labels in the `nodeSelector` using the command:

```shell
kubectl get mc sds-local-volume -o=jsonpath={.spec.settings.dataNodes.nodeSelector}
```

The approximate output of the command would be:

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  my-custom-label-key: my-custom-label-value
```

Remove the labels specified in `nodeSelector` from the desired nodes.

```shell
kubectl label node %node-name% %label-from-selector%-
```
> Please note that to remove a label, you need to add a hyphen immediately after its key instead of its value.

As a result, the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pod should be deleted from the desired node. You can check its status using the command:

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get po -owide
```

If the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pod remains on the node after removing the `nodeSelector` label, please ensure that the labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field of the `d8-sds-local-volume-controller-config` in the config have indeed been successfully removed from the selected node.

You can verify this using the command:

```shell
kubectl get node %node-name% --show-labels
```

If the labels from `nodeSelector` are not present on the node, ensure that this node does not own any `LVMVolumeGroup` resources used by `LocalStorageClass` resources. More details about this check can be found [here](#how-to-check-if-there-are-dependent-resources-lvmvolumegroup-on-the-node).


> Please note that on the `LVMVolumeGroup` and `LocalStorageClass` resources, which prevent the node from being taken out of the module's control, the label `storage.deckhouse.io/sds-local-volume-candidate-for-eviction` will be displayed.
On the node itself, the label `storage.deckhouse.io/sds-local-volume-need-manual-eviction` will be present.


## How to check if there are dependent resources `LVMVolumeGroup` on the node?
To check for such resources, follow these steps:
1. Display the existing `LocalStorageClass` resources

```shell
kubectl get lsc
```

2. Check each of them for the list of used `LVMVolumeGroup` resources.

> If you want to list all `LocalStorageClass` resources at once, run the command:
> 
> ```shell
> kubectl get lsc -oyaml
> ```

```shell
kubectl get lsc %lsc-name% -oyaml
```

An approximate representation of `LocalStorageClass` could be:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
items:
- apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
  kind: LocalStorageClass
  metadata:
    finalizers:
    - localstorageclass.storage.deckhouse.io
    name: test-sc
  spec:
    lvm:
      lvmVolumeGroups:
      - name: test-vg
      type: Thick
    reclaimPolicy: Delete
    volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
  status:
    phase: Created
kind: List
```

> Please pay attention to the `spec.lvm.lvmVolumeGroups` field - it specifies the used `LVMVolumeGroup` resources.

3. Display the list of existing `LVMVolumeGroup` resources.

```shell
kubectl get lvg
```

An approximate representation of `LVMVolumeGroup` could be:

```text
NAME              HEALTH        NODE                         SIZE       ALLOCATED SIZE   VG        AGE
lvg-on-worker-0   Operational   node-worker-0   40956Mi    0                test-vg   15d
lvg-on-worker-1   Operational   node-worker-1   61436Mi    0                test-vg   15d
lvg-on-worker-2   Operational   node-worker-2   122876Mi   0                test-vg   15d
lvg-on-worker-3   Operational   node-worker-3   307196Mi   0                test-vg   15d
lvg-on-worker-4   Operational   node-worker-4   307196Mi   0                test-vg   15d
lvg-on-worker-5   Operational   node-worker-5   204796Mi   0                test-vg   15d
```

4. Ensure that the node you intend to remove from the module's control does not have any `LVMVolumeGroup` resources used in `LocalStorageClass` resources.

> To avoid unintentionally losing control over volumes already created using the module, the user needs to manually delete dependent resources by performing necessary operations on the volume.

## I removed the labels from the node, but the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pod is still there. Why did this happen? 
Most likely, there are `LVMVolumeGroup` resources present on the node, which are used in one of the `LocalStorageClass` resources.

To avoid unintentionally losing control over volumes already created using the module, the user needs to manually delete dependent resources by performing necessary operations on the volume."

The process of checking for the presence of the aforementioned resources is described [here](#how-to-check-if-there-are-dependent-resources-lvmvolumegroup-on-the-node).


## Service pods for the `sds-local-volume` components are not being created on the node I need. Why is that?

With a high probability, the issues are related to the labels on the node.

Nodes to be used by the module are determined by special labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field in the module settings.

To display the existing labels specified in the `nodeSelector` field, you can execute the command:

```shell
kubectl get mc sds-local-volume -o=jsonpath={.spec.settings.dataNodes.nodeSelector}
```

The approximate output of the command would be:

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  my-custom-label-key: my-custom-label-value
```

Nodes whose labels include the set specified in the settings are chosen by the module as targets for usage.

You can also additionally check the selectors used by the module in the configuration of the secret `d8-sds-local-volume-controller-config` in the namespace `d8-sds-local-volume`.

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get secret d8-sds-local-volume-controller-config  -o jsonpath='{.data.config}' | base64 --decode
```

The approximate output of the command would be:

```yaml
nodeSelector:
  kubernetes.io/os: linux
  my-custom-label-key: my-custom-label-value
```

> The output of this command should include all labels from the settings of the `data.nodeSelector` module, as well as `kubernetes.io/os: linux`.

Check the labels on the node you need:

```shell
kubectl get node %node-name% --show-labels
```

If necessary, add the missing labels to the desired node:

```shell
kubectl label node %node-name% my-custom-label-key=my-custom-label-value
```

If the labels are present, it's necessary to check for the existence of the label `storage.deckhouse.io/sds-local-volume-node=` on the node. If the label is absent, it's advisable to verify whether `sds-local-volume-controller` is functioning properly. If it is, then check the logs:

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get po -l app=sds-local-volume-controller
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume logs -l app=sds-local-volume-controller
```
