docs/README.md, before:

---
title: "The sds-local-volume module"
description: "The sds-local-volume module: General Concepts and Principles."
---

The module manages local block storage based on LVM. It enables the creation of StorageClasses in Kubernetes using [LocalStorageClass](cr.html#localstorageclass) custom resources.

To create a StorageClass, you must first configure LVMVolumeGroup on the cluster nodes. The LVM configuration is handled by the [sds-node-configurator](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/) module.

## Module setup steps

To ensure the correct operation of the `sds-local-volume` module, follow these steps:

- Configure LVMVolumeGroup.

  Before creating a StorageClass, you need to create the [LVMVolumeGroup](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/cr.html#lvmvolumegroup) resource of the `sds-node-configurator` module on the cluster nodes.

- Enable the [sds-node-configurator](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/) module.

  Ensure that the `sds-node-configurator` module is enabled **before** enabling the `sds-local-volume` module.

- Create the corresponding StorageClasses.

  The creation of StorageClasses for the CSI driver `local.csi.storage.deckhouse.io` is **prohibited** for users.

The module supports two operation modes: LVM (Thick) and LVM Thin.
Each mode has its own features, advantages, and limitations. For more details on the differences, refer to the [FAQ](./faq.html#when-to-use-lvm-and-when-to-use-lvm-thin).

## Quickstart guide

Note that all commands must be run on a machine that has administrator access to the Kubernetes API.

### Enabling modules

Enabling the `sds-node-configurator` module:

1. Create a ModuleConfig resource to enable the module:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: ModuleConfig
   metadata:
     name: sds-node-configurator
   spec:
     enabled: true
     version: 1
   EOF
   ```

1. Wait for the module to become `Ready`. At this stage, there is no need to check the pods in the `d8-sds-node-configurator`.

   ```shell
   kubectl get modules sds-node-configurator -w
   ```

Enabling the `sds-local-volume` module:

1. Activate the `sds-local-volume` module. Before enabling it, we recommend reviewing the [available settings](./configuration.html). The example below starts the module with default settings, which will result in service pods of the `sds-local-volume` component being deployed on all cluster nodes:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: ModuleConfig
   metadata:
     name: sds-local-volume
   spec:
     enabled: true
     version: 1
   EOF
   ```

1. Wait for the module to become `Ready`.

   ```shell
   kubectl get modules sds-local-volume -w
   ```

1. Make sure that all pods in `d8-sds-local-volume` and `d8-sds-node-configurator` namespaces are `Running` or `Completed` and are running on all nodes where LVM resources are intended to be used.

   ```shell
   kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get pod -owide -w
   kubectl -n d8-sds-node-configurator get pod -o wide -w
   ```

### Preparing nodes for storage provisioning

To create storage on nodes, it's necessary for the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pods to be running on the selected nodes.

By default, the pods will be scheduled on all nodes in the cluster. You can verify their presence using the command:

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get pod -owide
```

The location of the pod data is determined by special labels (nodeSelector) specified in the [spec.settings.dataNodes.nodeSelector](configuration.html#parameters-datanodes-nodeselector) field in the module settings. Read more in the [module FAQ](./faq.html#i-dont-want-the-module-to-be-used-on-all-nodes-of-the-cluster-how-can-i-select-the-desired-nodes).

### Configuring storage on nodes

You need to create LVM volume groups on the nodes using LVMVolumeGroup custom resources. As part of this quickstart guide, we will create a regular storage Thick.

{{< alert level="warning" >}}
Please ensure that the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pod is running on the node before creating the `LVMVolumeGroup`. You can do this using the command:

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get pod -owide
```

{{< /alert >}}

#### Storage setup steps

1. Get all available [BlockDevice](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/cr.html#blockdevice) resources available in your cluster:

   ```shell
   kubectl get bd

   NAME                                           NODE       CONSUMABLE   SIZE           PATH
   dev-ef4fb06b63d2c05fb6ee83008b55e486aa1161aa   worker-0   false        976762584Ki    /dev/nvme1n1
   dev-0cfc0d07f353598e329d34f3821bed992c1ffbcd   worker-0   false        894006140416   /dev/nvme0n1p6
   dev-7e4df1ddf2a1b05a79f9481cdf56d29891a9f9d0   worker-1   false        976762584Ki    /dev/nvme1n1
   dev-b103062f879a2349a9c5f054e0366594568de68d   worker-1   false        894006140416   /dev/nvme0n1p6
   dev-53d904f18b912187ac82de29af06a34d9ae23199   worker-2   false        976762584Ki    /dev/nvme1n1
   dev-6c5abbd549100834c6b1668c8f89fb97872ee2b1   worker-2   false        894006140416   /dev/nvme0n1p6
   ```

1. Create an [LVMVolumeGroup](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/cr.html#lvmvolumegroup) resource for `worker-0`:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: LVMVolumeGroup
   metadata:
     name: "vg-1-on-worker-0" # The name can be any fully qualified resource name in Kubernetes. This LVMVolumeGroup resource name will be used to create LocalStorageClass in the future
   spec:
     type: Local
     local:
       nodeName: "worker-0"
     blockDeviceSelector:
       matchExpressions:
         - key: kubernetes.io/metadata.name
           operator: In
           values:
             - dev-ef4fb06b63d2c05fb6ee83008b55e486aa1161aa
             - dev-0cfc0d07f353598e329d34f3821bed992c1ffbcd
     actualVGNameOnTheNode: "vg-1" # The name of the LVM VG to be created from the above block devices on the node
   EOF
   ```

1. Wait for the created LVMVolumeGroup resource to become `Ready`:

   ```shell
   kubectl get lvg vg-1-on-worker-0 -w
   ```

   The resource becoming `Ready` means that an LVM VG named `vg-1` made up of the `/dev/nvme1n1` and `/dev/nvme0n1p6` block devices has been created on the `worker-0` node.

1. Create an [LVMVolumeGroup](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/cr.html#lvmvolumegroup) resource for `worker-1`:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: LVMVolumeGroup
   metadata:
     name: "vg-1-on-worker-1"
   spec:
     type: Local
     local:
       nodeName: "worker-1"
     blockDeviceSelector:
       matchExpressions:
         - key: kubernetes.io/metadata.name
           operator: In
           values:
             - dev-7e4df1ddf2a1b05a79f9481cdf56d29891a9f9d0
             - dev-b103062f879a2349a9c5f054e0366594568de68d
     actualVGNameOnTheNode: "vg-1"
   EOF
   ```

1. Wait for the created LVMVolumeGroup resource to become `Ready`:

   ```shell
   kubectl get lvg vg-1-on-worker-1 -w
   ```

   The resource becoming `Ready` means that an LVM VG named `vg-1` made up of the `/dev/nvme1n1` and `/dev/nvme0n1p6` block device has been created on the `worker-1` node.

1. Create an [LVMVolumeGroup](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/cr.html#lvmvolumegroup) resource for `worker-2`:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: LVMVolumeGroup
   metadata:
     name: "vg-1-on-worker-2"
   spec:
     type: Local
     local:
       nodeName: "worker-2"
     blockDeviceSelector:
       matchExpressions:
         - key: kubernetes.io/metadata.name
           operator: In
           values:
             - dev-53d904f18b912187ac82de29af06a34d9ae23199
             - dev-6c5abbd549100834c6b1668c8f89fb97872ee2b1
     actualVGNameOnTheNode: "vg-1"
   EOF
   ```

1. Wait for the created LVMVolumeGroup resource to become `Ready`:

   ```shell
   kubectl get lvg vg-1-on-worker-2 -w
   ```

   The resource becoming `Ready` means that an LVM VG named `vg-1` made up of the `/dev/nvme1n1` and `/dev/nvme0n1p6` block device has been created on the `worker-2` node.

1. Create a [LocalStorageClass](./cr.html#localstorageclass) resource:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f -<<EOF
   apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: LocalStorageClass
   metadata:
     name: local-storage-class
   spec:
     lvm:
       lvmVolumeGroups:
         - name: vg-1-on-worker-0
         - name: vg-1-on-worker-1
         - name: vg-1-on-worker-2
       type: Thick
     reclaimPolicy: Delete
     volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
   EOF
   ```

   For thin volumes

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f -<<EOF
   apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: LocalStorageClass
   metadata:
     name: local-storage-class
   spec:
     lvm:
       lvmVolumeGroups:
        - name: vg-1-on-worker-0
          thin:
            poolName: thin-1
        - name: vg-1-on-worker-1
          thin:
            poolName: thin-1
        - name: vg-1-on-worker-2
          thin:
            poolName: thin-1
       type: Thin
     reclaimPolicy: Delete
     volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
   EOF
   ```
> **Caution.** A `LocalStorageClass` with `type: Thick` cannot use an LocalVolumeGroup that includes even a single thin pool.

1. Wait for the created LocalStorageClass resource to become `Created`:

   ```shell
   kubectl get lsc local-storage-class -w
   ```

1. Confirm that the corresponding StorageClass has been created:

   ```shell
   kubectl get sc local-storage-class
   ```

If StorageClass with the name `local-storage-class` is shown, then the configuration of the `sds-local-volume` module is complete. Now users can create PVCs by specifying StorageClass with the name `local-storage-class`.

### Selects the method to clean the volume before deleting the PV

When deleting files, the operating system does not physically delete the contents, but only marks the corresponding blocks as “free”. If a new volume receives physical blocks previously used by another volume, the previous user's data may remain in them.

This is possible, for example, in the following case:

- user №1 placed files in the volume requested from StorageClass 1 and on node 1 (no matter in “Block” or “Filesystem” mode);
- user №1 deleted the files and the volume;
- the physical blocks it occupied become “free” but not wiped;
- user №2 requested a new volume from StorageClass 1 and on node 1 in “Block” mode;
- there is a risk that some or all of the blocks previously occupied by user №1 will be reallocated to user №2;
- in which case user №2 has the ability to recover user №1's data.

### Thick volumes

The `volumeCleanup` parameter is provided to prevent leaks through thick volumes.
It allows to select the volume cleanup method before deleting the PV.
Allowed values:

- parameter not specified — do not perform any additional actions when deleting a volume. The data may be available to the next user;

- `RandomFillSinglePass` - the volume will be overwritten with random data once before deletion. Use of this option is not recommended for solid-state drives as it reduces the lifespan of the drive.

- `RandomFillThreePass` - the volume will be overwritten with random data three times before deletion. Use of this option is not recommended for solid-state drives as it reduces the lifespan of the drive.

- `Discard` - all blocks of the volume will be marked as free using the `discard` system call before deletion. This option is only applicable to solid-state drives.

Most modern solid-state drives ensure that a `discard` marked block will not return previous data when read. This makes the `Discard' option the most effective way to prevent leakage when using solid-state drives.
However, clearing a cell is a relatively long operation, so it is performed in the background by the device. In addition, many drives cannot clear individual cells, only groups - pages. Because of this, not all drives guarantee immediate unavailability of the freed data. In addition, not all drives that do guarantee this keep the promise.
If the device does not guarantee Deterministic TRIM (DRAT), Deterministic Read Zero after TRIM (RZAT) and is not tested, then it is not recommended.

### Thin volumes

When a thin-pool block is released via `discard` by the guest operating system, this command is forwarded to the device. If a hard disk drive is used or if there is no `discard` support from the solid-state drive, the data may remain on the thin-pool until such a block is used again. However, users are only given access to thin volumes, not the thin-pool itself. They can only retrieve a volume from the pool, and the thin volumes are nulled for the thin-pool block on new use, preventing leakage between clients. This is guaranteed by setting `thin_pool_zero=1` in LVM.

## System requirements and recommendations

- Use the stock kernels provided with the [supported distributions](https://deckhouse.io/documentation/v1/supported_versions.html#linux).
- Do not use another SDS (Software defined storage) to provide disks to Deckhouse SDS.

Commit message:

[internal] add snapshot-controller requirement info

docs/README.md, after:

---
title: "The sds-local-volume module"
description: "The sds-local-volume module: General Concepts and Principles."
---

The module manages local block storage based on LVM. It enables the creation of StorageClasses in Kubernetes using [LocalStorageClass](cr.html#localstorageclass) custom resources.

To create a StorageClass, you must first configure LVMVolumeGroup on the cluster nodes. The LVM configuration is handled by the [sds-node-configurator](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/) module.

## Module setup steps

To ensure the correct operation of the `sds-local-volume` module, follow these steps:

- Configure LVMVolumeGroup.

  Before creating a StorageClass, you need to create the [LVMVolumeGroup](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/cr.html#lvmvolumegroup) resource of the `sds-node-configurator` module on the cluster nodes.

- Enable the [sds-node-configurator](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/) module.

  Ensure that the `sds-node-configurator` module is enabled **before** enabling the `sds-local-volume` module.

- Create the corresponding StorageClasses.

  The creation of StorageClasses for the CSI driver `local.csi.storage.deckhouse.io` is **prohibited** for users.

{{< alert level="info" >}}
For working with snapshots, the [snapshot-controller](../../snapshot-controller/) module must be connected.
{{< /alert >}}

The module supports two operation modes: LVM (Thick) and LVM Thin.
Each mode has its own features, advantages, and limitations. For more details on the differences, refer to the [FAQ](./faq.html#when-to-use-lvm-and-when-to-use-lvm-thin).

## Quickstart guide

Note that all commands must be run on a machine that has administrator access to the Kubernetes API.

### Enabling modules

Enabling the `sds-node-configurator` module:

1. Create a ModuleConfig resource to enable the module:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: ModuleConfig
   metadata:
     name: sds-node-configurator
   spec:
     enabled: true
     version: 1
   EOF
   ```

1. Wait for the module to become `Ready`. At this stage, there is no need to check the pods in the `d8-sds-node-configurator`.

   ```shell
   kubectl get modules sds-node-configurator -w
   ```

Enabling the `sds-local-volume` module:

1. Activate the `sds-local-volume` module. Before enabling it, we recommend reviewing the [available settings](./configuration.html). The example below starts the module with default settings, which will result in service pods of the `sds-local-volume` component being deployed on all cluster nodes:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: ModuleConfig
   metadata:
     name: sds-local-volume
   spec:
     enabled: true
     version: 1
   EOF
   ```

1. Wait for the module to become `Ready`.

   ```shell
   kubectl get modules sds-local-volume -w
   ```

1. Make sure that all pods in `d8-sds-local-volume` and `d8-sds-node-configurator` namespaces are `Running` or `Completed` and are running on all nodes where LVM resources are intended to be used.

   ```shell
   kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get pod -owide -w
   kubectl -n d8-sds-node-configurator get pod -o wide -w
   ```

### Preparing nodes for storage provisioning

To create storage on nodes, it's necessary for the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pods to be running on the selected nodes.

By default, the pods will be scheduled on all nodes in the cluster. You can verify their presence using the command:

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get pod -owide
```

The location of the pod data is determined by special labels (nodeSelector) specified in the [spec.settings.dataNodes.nodeSelector](configuration.html#parameters-datanodes-nodeselector) field in the module settings. Read more in the [module FAQ](./faq.html#i-dont-want-the-module-to-be-used-on-all-nodes-of-the-cluster-how-can-i-select-the-desired-nodes).

### Configuring storage on nodes

You need to create LVM volume groups on the nodes using LVMVolumeGroup custom resources. As part of this quickstart guide, we will create a regular storage Thick.

{{< alert level="warning" >}}
Please ensure that the `sds-local-volume-csi-node` pod is running on the node before creating the `LVMVolumeGroup`. You can do this using the command:

```shell
kubectl -n d8-sds-local-volume get pod -owide
```

{{< /alert >}}

#### Storage setup steps

1. Get all available [BlockDevice](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/cr.html#blockdevice) resources available in your cluster:

   ```shell
   kubectl get bd

   NAME                                           NODE       CONSUMABLE   SIZE           PATH
   dev-ef4fb06b63d2c05fb6ee83008b55e486aa1161aa   worker-0   false        976762584Ki    /dev/nvme1n1
   dev-0cfc0d07f353598e329d34f3821bed992c1ffbcd   worker-0   false        894006140416   /dev/nvme0n1p6
   dev-7e4df1ddf2a1b05a79f9481cdf56d29891a9f9d0   worker-1   false        976762584Ki    /dev/nvme1n1
   dev-b103062f879a2349a9c5f054e0366594568de68d   worker-1   false        894006140416   /dev/nvme0n1p6
   dev-53d904f18b912187ac82de29af06a34d9ae23199   worker-2   false        976762584Ki    /dev/nvme1n1
   dev-6c5abbd549100834c6b1668c8f89fb97872ee2b1   worker-2   false        894006140416   /dev/nvme0n1p6
   ```

1. Create an [LVMVolumeGroup](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/cr.html#lvmvolumegroup) resource for `worker-0`:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: LVMVolumeGroup
   metadata:
     name: "vg-1-on-worker-0" # The name can be any fully qualified resource name in Kubernetes. This LVMVolumeGroup resource name will be used to create LocalStorageClass in the future
   spec:
     type: Local
     local:
       nodeName: "worker-0"
     blockDeviceSelector:
       matchExpressions:
         - key: kubernetes.io/metadata.name
           operator: In
           values:
             - dev-ef4fb06b63d2c05fb6ee83008b55e486aa1161aa
             - dev-0cfc0d07f353598e329d34f3821bed992c1ffbcd
     actualVGNameOnTheNode: "vg-1" # The name of the LVM VG to be created from the above block devices on the node
   EOF
   ```

1. Wait for the created LVMVolumeGroup resource to become `Ready`:

   ```shell
   kubectl get lvg vg-1-on-worker-0 -w
   ```

   The resource becoming `Ready` means that an LVM VG named `vg-1` made up of the `/dev/nvme1n1` and `/dev/nvme0n1p6` block devices has been created on the `worker-0` node.

1. Create an [LVMVolumeGroup](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/cr.html#lvmvolumegroup) resource for `worker-1`:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: LVMVolumeGroup
   metadata:
     name: "vg-1-on-worker-1"
   spec:
     type: Local
     local:
       nodeName: "worker-1"
     blockDeviceSelector:
       matchExpressions:
         - key: kubernetes.io/metadata.name
           operator: In
           values:
             - dev-7e4df1ddf2a1b05a79f9481cdf56d29891a9f9d0
             - dev-b103062f879a2349a9c5f054e0366594568de68d
     actualVGNameOnTheNode: "vg-1"
   EOF
   ```

1. Wait for the created LVMVolumeGroup resource to become `Ready`:

   ```shell
   kubectl get lvg vg-1-on-worker-1 -w
   ```

   The resource becoming `Ready` means that an LVM VG named `vg-1` made up of the `/dev/nvme1n1` and `/dev/nvme0n1p6` block device has been created on the `worker-1` node.

1. Create an [LVMVolumeGroup](../../sds-node-configurator/stable/cr.html#lvmvolumegroup) resource for `worker-2`:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
   apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: LVMVolumeGroup
   metadata:
     name: "vg-1-on-worker-2"
   spec:
     type: Local
     local:
       nodeName: "worker-2"
     blockDeviceSelector:
       matchExpressions:
         - key: kubernetes.io/metadata.name
           operator: In
           values:
             - dev-53d904f18b912187ac82de29af06a34d9ae23199
             - dev-6c5abbd549100834c6b1668c8f89fb97872ee2b1
     actualVGNameOnTheNode: "vg-1"
   EOF
   ```

1. Wait for the created LVMVolumeGroup resource to become `Ready`:

   ```shell
   kubectl get lvg vg-1-on-worker-2 -w
   ```

   The resource becoming `Ready` means that an LVM VG named `vg-1` made up of the `/dev/nvme1n1` and `/dev/nvme0n1p6` block device has been created on the `worker-2` node.

1. Create a [LocalStorageClass](./cr.html#localstorageclass) resource:

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f -<<EOF
   apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: LocalStorageClass
   metadata:
     name: local-storage-class
   spec:
     lvm:
       lvmVolumeGroups:
         - name: vg-1-on-worker-0
         - name: vg-1-on-worker-1
         - name: vg-1-on-worker-2
       type: Thick
     reclaimPolicy: Delete
     volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
   EOF
   ```

   For thin volumes

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f -<<EOF
   apiVersion: storage.deckhouse.io/v1alpha1
   kind: LocalStorageClass
   metadata:
     name: local-storage-class
   spec:
     lvm:
       lvmVolumeGroups:
        - name: vg-1-on-worker-0
          thin:
            poolName: thin-1
        - name: vg-1-on-worker-1
          thin:
            poolName: thin-1
        - name: vg-1-on-worker-2
          thin:
            poolName: thin-1
       type: Thin
     reclaimPolicy: Delete
     volumeBindingMode: WaitForFirstConsumer
   EOF
   ```
> **Caution.** A `LocalStorageClass` with `type: Thick` cannot use an LocalVolumeGroup that includes even a single thin pool.

1. Wait for the created LocalStorageClass resource to become `Created`:

   ```shell
   kubectl get lsc local-storage-class -w
   ```

1. Confirm that the corresponding StorageClass has been created:

   ```shell
   kubectl get sc local-storage-class
   ```

If StorageClass with the name `local-storage-class` is shown, then the configuration of the `sds-local-volume` module is complete. Now users can create PVCs by specifying StorageClass with the name `local-storage-class`.

### Selects the method to clean the volume before deleting the PV

When deleting files, the operating system does not physically delete the contents, but only marks the corresponding blocks as “free”. If a new volume receives physical blocks previously used by another volume, the previous user's data may remain in them.

This is possible, for example, in the following case:

- user №1 placed files in the volume requested from StorageClass 1 and on node 1 (no matter in “Block” or “Filesystem” mode);
- user №1 deleted the files and the volume;
- the physical blocks it occupied become “free” but not wiped;
- user №2 requested a new volume from StorageClass 1 and on node 1 in “Block” mode;
- there is a risk that some or all of the blocks previously occupied by user №1 will be reallocated to user №2;
- in which case user №2 has the ability to recover user №1's data.

### Thick volumes

The `volumeCleanup` parameter is provided to prevent leaks through thick volumes.
It allows to select the volume cleanup method before deleting the PV.
Allowed values:

- parameter not specified — do not perform any additional actions when deleting a volume. The data may be available to the next user;

- `RandomFillSinglePass` - the volume will be overwritten with random data once before deletion. Use of this option is not recommended for solid-state drives as it reduces the lifespan of the drive.

- `RandomFillThreePass` - the volume will be overwritten with random data three times before deletion. Use of this option is not recommended for solid-state drives as it reduces the lifespan of the drive.

- `Discard` - all blocks of the volume will be marked as free using the `discard` system call before deletion. This option is only applicable to solid-state drives.

Most modern solid-state drives ensure that a `discard` marked block will not return previous data when read. This makes the `Discard' option the most effective way to prevent leakage when using solid-state drives.
However, clearing a cell is a relatively long operation, so it is performed in the background by the device. In addition, many drives cannot clear individual cells, only groups - pages. Because of this, not all drives guarantee immediate unavailability of the freed data. In addition, not all drives that do guarantee this keep the promise.
If the device does not guarantee Deterministic TRIM (DRAT), Deterministic Read Zero after TRIM (RZAT) and is not tested, then it is not recommended.

### Thin volumes

When a thin-pool block is released via `discard` by the guest operating system, this command is forwarded to the device. If a hard disk drive is used or if there is no `discard` support from the solid-state drive, the data may remain on the thin-pool until such a block is used again. However, users are only given access to thin volumes, not the thin-pool itself. They can only retrieve a volume from the pool, and the thin volumes are nulled for the thin-pool block on new use, preventing leakage between clients. This is guaranteed by setting `thin_pool_zero=1` in LVM.

## System requirements and recommendations

- Use the stock kernels provided with the [supported distributions](https://deckhouse.io/documentation/v1/supported_versions.html#linux).
- Do not use another SDS (Software defined storage) to provide disks to Deckhouse SDS.
